Exercises
Create a new repository on GitHub to hold your assignments for the Databases module.
Create a new branch for Checkpoint 1. Submit your answers.

1. What data types do each of these values represent?

    1. "A Clockwork Orange" - string
    2. 42 - integer (numeric)
    3. 09/02/1945 - date (data and time)
    4. 98.7 - float (numeric)
    5. $15.99 - money or smallmoney (numeric)


2. Explain when a database would be used. Explain when a text file would be used.

A database allows users to manage data through an interface.  If you are dealing with data,
especially large amounts of data, and will need to access, add, delete, edit, and integrate
the data with other applications, a database is the way to go.  It will more effectively and
efficiently manage one's data.  A text file may be more useful if you are dealing with a small
amount of data that will just be looked at as a reference.


3. Describe one difference between SQL and other programming languages.

One main difference between SQL and many other languages is that SQL is a declarative language,
instead of a procedural language (JSX in React is also a declarative language). A declarative
language is concerned with WHAT the user wants to find/do rather than HOW the database will find it.
We don't define the search algorithm for the database, rather, we simply tell the database what we
are looking for.  The database engine will determine the best way of HOW to find it.



4. In your own words, explain how the pieces of a database system fit together at a high level.

A database system organizes data in a systematic way.  A database allows information (values) about
groups (tables) of items (rows) to be organized according to topics of information (columns).  Databases
allow you to view, add, delete, and edit data.


5. Explain the meaning of table, row, column, and value.

    Table: A table contains data to a particular grouping of items or people.  For example, I am
    a teacher who is currently entering grades for students.  I am able to look at the students' grades
    for the 4th quarter in a spreadsheet by class.  I look at the table for Period 1 to see all
    the grades of each student.

    Row: Each row represents a single item with information pertaining to it.  In my example with the
    students, each row containing data for an individual student.  Also in the row of that student is
    information such as their student id #, and grades for every assignment.

    Column: Columns indicate what kind of data will be stored there.  For example, in the students
    grades example, while each row would contain information about a student.  Each column would
    indicate what kind of information would be present in that column.  You would have a column for
    "student name", "student id", "total grade", "homework 1", "homework 2", "homework 3", "quiz 1",
    "quiz 2", "quiz 3", "test 1"

    Value: At the intersection of each row and column in a table is a cell.  Each cell in a table
    contains a value.  The value is a piece of information the column name describes about what is in
    that particular row.  Using the previous example from above: 91 could be a value that appears
    under the "test 1" column in the row for "Jimmy Butler" ("Jimmy Butler" would also be a value under
    the column "student name").


6. List three data types that can be used in a table.

    1. string
    2. numeric: integer, float
    4. date



7. Given this payments table, provide an English description of the following queries and
include their results:

     SELECT date, amount
     FROM payments;

        In the above example, one is requesting that all of the values in the date and amount columns
        from the payments table be selected.  It would include the following:
          "date"                      "amount"
          '2016-05-01'                1500.00
          '2016-05-10'                  37.00
          '2016-05-15'                 124.93
          '2016-05-23'                  54.72


     SELECT amount
     FROM payments
     WHERE amount > 500;

          In the above example, one is requesting that any value in the amount column that is greater than
          500 from the payments table be selected.  It would include the following:

            'amount'
            1500.00


     SELECT *
     FROM payments
     WHERE payee = 'Mega Foods';

          In the above example, one is requesting that all values in the row for 'Mega Foods' in the
          payments table be selected.
          It would include the following:

              "date",       "payee",        "amount", "memo"
            '2016-05-15', 'Mega Foods',      124.93,  'Groceries'



8. Given this users table, write SQL queries using the following criteria and include the output:

The email and sign-up date for the user named DeAndre Data.

      SELECT email, signup
      FROM users
      WHERE name = 'DeAndre Data';

      "email",                    "signup"
      'datad@comcast.net',        '2008-01-20'


The user ID for the user with email 'aleesia.algorithm@uw.edu'.

      SELECT userid
      FROM users
      WHERE email = 'aleesia.algorithm@uw.edu';

      "userid"
      1


All the columns for the user ID equal to 4.

      SELECT *
      FROM users
      WHERE userid = 4;

      "userid", "name",              "email",                        "signup"
      4,       'Brandy Boolean',    'bboolean@nasa.gov',            '1999-10-15'




Additional practice:

SQLCourse http://www.sqlcourse.com/intro.html
HackerRank  https://www.hackerrank.com/domains/sql?filters%5Bsubdomains%5D%5B%5D=select
